(DOCSP-20720): Breaking vs. Non-Breaking Schema/Model Updates (#1729)
mongodb/docs-realm: source/sync/data-model/update-schema.txt

work with the new schema changes.

.. important:: Breaking and Non-Breaking may differ between server and client

   Some things that are non-breaking as server-side schema changes become
   breaking changes in the client object model, and vice versa. Do not
   consider the client model and the server schema interchangeable.

.. _additive-changes-synced-schema:
.. _non-breaking-changes-synced-schema:

Non-Breaking Changes
--------------------

A non-breaking change is a change that you can make in your server-side
schema or your object model without requiring additional handling in your
app.

Server-Side Schema Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Non-breaking changes to the server-side schema are **additions** to the 
schema, such as:

- adding a class
- adding a required property to an existing class
- adding an optional property to an existing class

Realm refers to these types of non-breaking changes as additive changes.
They apply automatically to synced {+realms+}; you can make these 
non-breaking schema changes with no additional client-side configuration 
changes.

.. note:: Applying non-breaking changes to the client may require migration

>    When you _only_ make non-breaking changes to the server-side schema, 

Reviewer: Note these _underscores_ render literally in rST - for emphasis use `*asterisks*`.

Author: Blarg, thank you - too much syntax switching between rST and markdown lately.

--------

When developing an application using {+sync+}, you may need to make changes to
your schema at some point, such as when you: 

> - Need to add a new property to an already-synced object

Reviewer 2: [nit] I think the verb start here is a bit odd personally but not sure if this is preferred. I would think that the following is easier (and less words)

```
your schema at some point, such as when you need to:
- Add a new property to an already-synced object
- Remove a property from an already-synced object
- Change the type stored in a property
- Update an optional property to *required* 
```

be avoided whenever possible.

Breaking schema changes are difficult because older clients (those that 
have not been updated to your new code and schema) still need access to 
the data via the old schema definition. Clients that are updated need to 
work with the new schema changes.

.. important:: Breaking and Non-Breaking may differ between server and client

   Some things that are non-breaking as server-side schema changes become
   breaking changes in the client object model, and vice versa. Do not
   consider the client model and the server schema interchangeable.

Breaking vs. Non-Breaking Change Quick Reference
------------------------------------------------

This table shows whether each type of change is breaking or non-breaking
when you make it only in the server-side schema or in the object model.
Some changes that are non-breaking on the client-side are breaking on
the server-side. Additionally, some changes that are non-breaking on the
server-side schema may require additional handling when you apply them to 
the client-side object model. For more details, see relevant sections below.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

>    * - Type of Change

Author: It was @cbush 's idea, but I'm glad folks like it! Seems like this is the star of the update. Great idea, Bush!

   * - Change property type but keep the name
     - Breaking
     - Breaking
   * - Change property name
     - Breaking
     - Breaking
   * - Change property from optional to required
     - Breaking
     - Breaking
   * - Change property from required to optional
     - Breaking
     - Breaking
   * - Change a class name
     - Breaking
     - Breaking

.. _additive-changes-synced-schema:
.. _non-breaking-changes-synced-schema:

Non-Breaking Changes
--------------------

A non-breaking change is a change that you can make in your server-side
schema or your object model without requiring additional handling in your
app.

Server-Side Schema Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Non-breaking changes to the server-side schema are **additions** to the 
schema, such as:

- adding a class
- adding a required property to an existing class
- adding an optional property to an existing class

Realm refers to these types of non-breaking changes as additive changes.
They apply automatically to synced {+realms+}; you can make these 
non-breaking schema changes with no additional client-side configuration 
changes.

.. note:: Applying non-breaking changes to the client may require migration

>    When you _only_ make non-breaking changes to the server-side schema, 

Reviewer 2: These are rendering oddly in staging

Author: Author error - fixed now!

.. note:: These changes may trigger a resync

   When you add a new object type, we retreive the documents for the 
   collection and re-insert them into Realm to get the new values. This
   is expected behavior, but it does cause a temporary halt to propogating 
   changes while this process is underway.
   
Add a Required Property
-----------------------

You can add a required property to the client object model without doing 
any additional handling. 

.. warning:: Update existing documents

   If you add a new required property to the server-side schema, you must 
   update existing documents with that new property or they do not sync 
   to the client. This may give client users the impression that the data 
   has been lost.

How to Add a Required Property
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you want to add a required property to both the server-side schema and 
the client object model, you can add the required property to the object 
model, and use :ref:`Development Mode <enable-development-mode>` to let 
Realm infer the server-side schema updates. Or you can manually add the 
required property to both the model and the schema.

> .. important:: Even non-breaking changes can require terminating sync

Author: This was added per a TSE request from a Jira ticket last month: https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/DOCSP-20651

   When there are more than 100,000 documents in the 
   ``__realm_sync.unsynced_documents`` collection, Realm requires that you
   :ref:`terminate and re-enable sync <terminating-realm-sync>`. When you 
   add a required property, the re-sync process can push your collection
   over this limit. In this case, you must terminate and re-enable sync, 
   even though the change you're making is a non-breaking change.

Handle Existing Atlas Documents
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you add a new required property to the server-side schema, you must 
update existing documents with that new property or they do not sync 
to the client. This may give client users the impression that the data 
has been lost.

> If you add a new required property to the server-side schema, you must 

Author: Nice spot! I did a bunch of refactoring to make the language more uniform and missed this duplicate. Thanks for catching it!

object, you decide to change the type stored in a property, or you now need to 
make a property *required*, for example. 

> To make it easier to understand how schema changes affect your app, we

Reviewer 3: The intro paragraph above this could *really* use some bullets IMO.

characterize them as "breaking" versus "non-breaking" changes.

The {+service-short+} APIs provide for 
non-breaking schema changes to synced realms, allowing old clients to
sync with newer ones.

Breaking schema changes, however, take some planning and work, and should
be avoided whenever possible.

> The difficulty with implementing a breaking schema changes is that older 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Breaking schema changes are difficult because
```
I feel like the first sentence is a bit wordy, does this help?

clients (those that have not been updated to your new code and schema) still 
need access to the data via the old schema definition, while clients that are 
updated need to work with the new schema changes.

.. important:: Breaking and Non-Breaking may differ between server and client

   Some things that are non-breaking as server-side schema changes become
   breaking changes in the client object model, and vice versa. Do not
   consider the client model and the server schema interchangeable.

.. _additive-changes-synced-schema:
.. _non-breaking-changes-synced-schema:

Non-Breaking Changes
--------------------

A non-breaking change is a change that you can make in your server-side
schema or your object model without requiring additional handling in your
app.

Server-Side Schema Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Non-breaking changes to the server-side schema are **additions** to the 
schema, such as:

- adding a class
- adding a required property to an existing class
- adding an optional property to an existing class

> Realm refers to these types of non-breaking changes as additive changes.

Reviewer 3: Clever. I like the top level "breaking vs. non-breaking" distinction, with the added information that the term "additive" might be used elsewhere in the product (or even the documentation, lord)

Author: Yeah, I saw "additive" and "destructive" in error messages a lot while researching this, so I felt I had to leave the term in somehow for folks who might be searching for error codes or something.

They apply automatically to synced {+realms+}; you can make these 
non-breaking schema changes with no additional client-side configuration 
changes.

.. note:: Applying non-breaking changes to the client may require migration

>    When you __only__ make non-breaking changes to the server-side schema, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   When you *only* make non-breaking changes to the server-side schema, 
```
*dreams of markdown*

Author: Hah. Too much writing in Hugo recently!

   no additional action is required. However, if you then try to apply 
   these changes to your client object model, you may need to perform 
   a migration. If the client device has an existing realm file, you must
   perform a migration. For details, see the Modify an Object Schema

>    page in your preferred SDK.

Reviewer 3: Personally I dislike non-link call-to-actions because we could very easily forget to update this exact page name drop when we change the name of this page in one or more SDKs. Perhaps we could say "see the migration documentation in your preferred SDK" instead? Should be search/google-able.

Author: I'm torn about this one. I agree that we could easily forget to update this page name. But the ToC doesn't actually call the migration stuff "migration." In our other "seealso" type stuff, we always refer to the page name. I'd hate to think I'm sending a dev out to Google for this page instead of giving them the name of the page where they could theoretically just nav to it through the ToC. But I guess that may be a moot point soon if we separate the SDK docs. 🤔

Client Object Model Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> One type of change is non-breaking when you make it on the object model, but 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One type of change is non-breaking when you make it on the client side, but 
```
I understand that we're trying to refer to class definitions of realm objects here, but would it be easier to understand this if we instead said "client side" vs. server side?

> breaking when you make it the server side: removing a property from the 
> client object model.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
breaking when you make it on the server side: removing a property from an object.
```
Avoids redundancy with reword.

To maintain backward compatibility, removing a property from a client-side 
object model does not delete the property from the database. Instead, 
new objects retain the removed property, but Realm automatically sets the 
property's value to ``null``. Realm sets properties that are non-nullable to an
appropriate empty value, such as a 0 for integer values or an empty string
for string values. This is considered a non-breaking or additive change
to the object model.

However, if you remove a property from your object model and _also_ try to 
remove it from your server-side schema, removing it from the server-side
schema __is__ a breaking change. So you can safely remove a property from the 
client-side object model as a non-breaking change, but trying to remove it 

> from the server-side schema is a breaking change.

Reviewer 3: Interesting -- this makes a lot of sense. I wonder if we should

- consider moving this subsection out from under "Non-Breaking" because it gives the wrong idea
- wrap up with a bit more of a prescriptive sentence -- something like "Always leave properties in place on the server-side schema to avoid making a property removal a breaking change"

Author: Hmm. I think you're right about wrapping up with a more prescriptive change. With the new sentence in place, I think it justifies the placement of this subsection where it is, because it _is_ a non-breaking change as long as you don't remove it from the server-side schema. I think making recommendations about how to make changes non-breaking are helpful when breaking changes can be so dire.

Reviewer 3: Agreed, I like the new end paragraph.

.. _destructive-changes-synced-schema:
.. _breaking-changes-synced-schema:

Breaking Changes
----------------

A breaking change is a change that you can make in your server-side
schema that requires additional action to handle. The consequences of

> failing to handle these changes properly can be catastrophic to your app.

Reviewer 3: 2spooky4me

Author: Fair. I _want_ to convey the seriousness of making these changes (and we've been asked to convey that better by TSEs) but it's probably more helpful to just be explicit about the consequences. What about this?

> Failing to handle these changes properly can result in clients being unable to open a realm, or the appearance of data loss when server-side documents are unable to sync to client-side applications.

One example of a breaking change is a destructive change that requires you 
to :ref:`terminate and re-enable Sync <terminating-realm-sync>`, and 
perform a :ref:`client reset <client-resets>`. However, there
are also changes that may prevent documents from syncing to the device,
giving the appearance of lost data. Both of these types of changes are 
breaking changes.

**Modifications** of existing properties are breaking changes, whether you
modify the server-side schema or the client object model:

- changing a property's type but keeping the same name
- changing a property's name
- changing a primary key
- changing a property from optional to required (or vice-versa)

Server-Side Schema Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In addition to the modifications above, some changes breaking changes when 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition to the modifications above, some changes become breaking changes when 
```

> you perform them on the server-side schema, but non-breaking when you 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
you perform them on the server-side schema, but are non-breaking when you 
```

perform them only on the object model. These changes include:

- removing a required property from a class
- removing an optional property from a class
- removing a class

Client Object Model Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Synchronized {+realms+} only support non-breaking changes to an object model. 
Attempting to perform a breaking change on a synchronized 

> {+realm+} leads to errors like the following:

Reviewer 3: Curious. I would think that this leads to a client reset -- maybe we should mention that here? Maybe this error only occurs if you haven't implemented a client reset stategy? (of course, you'd have to handle this manually even if you use the automatically discard strategy)

Author: This error occurs when you make a breaking change in the client object model but you do _not_ make the corresponding change in the server-side schema. If you made this change in the server-side schema, it would immediately prompt you to terminate sync, which would lead to a client reset. 

That makes me wonder if we should have some sort of recommendation, like "always start with the server-side schema change" so people can find out if it's a change that will cause a client reset and maybe change their mind about making the change at all. 🤔

However, if you remove a property from your object model and _also_ try to 
remove it from your server-side schema, removing it from the server-side
schema _is_ a breaking change. So you can safely remove a property from the 
client-side object model as a non-breaking change, but trying to remove it 
from the server-side schema is a breaking change.

To avoid making a breaking change to the server-side schema, leave existing
fields in place even if you remove them from the client-side object model.
Then this operation is a non-breaking change.

.. _destructive-changes-synced-schema:
.. _breaking-changes-synced-schema:

Breaking Changes
----------------

A breaking change is a change that you can make in your server-side
schema that requires additional action to handle. Failing to handle these 
changes properly can result in clients being unable to open a realm, or
the appearance of data loss when server-side documents are unable to 

> sync to client-side applications.

Reviewer 3: Maybe a use case for bullets. I'll defer to your opinion here since it's only two (maybe we can come up with another scary case to make it three and thus definitely-bulletable)

    errorCode: 1
   }

.. _partner_collections:
.. _handle-breaking-sync-schema-changes:

How to Handle Breaking Changes
------------------------------

If you are developing an application using Realm Sync and need to make a 
breaking schema change, you have two choices: 

> - :ref:`Terminate sync <terminating-realm-sync>` in the backend and then :ref:`re-enable 
>    <enable-sync>` it, which triggers a :ref:`client reset <client-resets>`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- :ref:`Terminate sync <terminating-realm-sync>` in the backend and then
  :ref:`re-enable <enable-sync>` sync, which triggers a :ref:`client reset <client-resets>`
```

handle any unsynced changes on client devices. You can discard the changes,
or write your own logic to attempt to sync them. Terminating and re-enabling
Sync is extremely disruptive to production applications, so it is not
recommended except as a last resort. 

If you must make breaking changes to your schema, the preferred technique 
is to let the existing collection remain in place with the existing schema, 
and create a partner collection with the new schema. 

A partner collection is a collection that contains the same data as
the original collection, but has the new schema definition in place. Partner
collections use database triggers to ensure that data flows in both directions,
meaning that when one collection is written to, the other is also written to 
(with the data modifications required for the new schema).

To implement a breaking schema change, see :ref:`<migrate-schema-partner-collection>`.

.. note:: Make destructive changes via the Realm UI

   Because destructive schema changes require special handling, Realm does not
   support making these changes via Realm CLI or automated deploy with GitHub.
   Instead, you should make destructive changes in the Realm UI.

> With some types of breaking changes, even after you terminate and re-enable 

Reviewer 3: I feel like we could use a subsection here -- maybe "Additional Handling in Atlas"?

Sync and perform a client reset, you must do perform additional handling
of existing Atlas documents to enable them to Sync with your client 
applications. Without this additional handling, those documents do not Sync
and it may appear in the client that the data has been lost.

> These breaking changesrequire additional handling of existing Atlas documents:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These breaking changes require additional handling of existing Atlas documents:
```
